## Establishing the Cross-Cancer Mutational Landscape through Differential Gene Expression Analysis

### Abstract
Cancer is primarily characterized by abnormal cell growth, stemming from mutations that impact certain biological processes in healthy cells. As mutations often lead to differences in gene expression, previous studies have performed transcriptomic analysis to assess changes in gene expression between healthy and diseased states in a single type of cancer. However, existing studies did not incorporate definitive approaches to outline the variation in gene expression that contribute to undesirable phenotypic effects across multiple types of cancer. To overcome these limitations, the objective of our analysis is to outline the similarities and the differences in the gene expression profiles of breast invasive adenocarcinoma (BRCA), colon adenocarcinoma (COAD), kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC), and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). We hypothesize that differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) shared across multiple cancer types will exhibit a similar pattern and magnitude of expression, and impact similar pathways associated with cancer development. Conversely, we also hypothesize that DEGs unique to each cancer type will display cancer-specific patterns of expression, and subsequently impact different biological processes. We performed cross-cancer comparison to identify shared DEGs across BRCA, COAD, KIRC, and LUAD. We also executed functional enrichment analysis to identify biological processes associated with significant DEGs. We observed that shared DEGs exhibit a similar pattern and magnitude of differential expression across BRCA, COAD, KIRC, and LUAD. Furthermore, we conclude that shared DEGs impact similar biological pathways in cancer development, including the mitotic cell cycle, metabolic processes, and immune response mechanisms. However, we observe that cancer-specific DEGs also impact biological processes commonly associated with cancer development. Overall, our analysis characterizes the primary genetic associations responsible for cancer development, and provides insight into candidate genes and target biological pathways that may serve as potential biomarkers for cancer treatment.
